Adding bloom command meta data, bloom group and bloom data type documentaion (#233)
valkey-io/valkey-doc: topics/bloomfilters.md

---

> title: "Bloom Filters"

Reviewer: Could we also include the section/s below:

1. Scaling / Non Scaling Filters and their implications

Author: Added this section and instead of putting the implication in performance added a subsection to the scaling and non scaling section

Use a Bloom filter for every user, storing all bought products. The recommendation engine can then suggest a new product and checks if the product is in the user's Bloom filter.

* If no, the ad is shown to the user and is added to the Bloom filter.
* If yes, the process restarts and repeats until it finds a product that is not present in the filter.

### Check if URL's are malicious

Bloom filters can answer the question "is a URL malicious?". Any URL inputted would be checked against a malicious URL bloom filter. 

* If no then we allow access to the site
* If yes then we can deny access or perform a full check of the URL

### Check if a username is taken

Bloom filters can answer the question: Has this username/email/domain name/slug already been used?

For example for usernames. Use a Bloom filter for every username that has signed up. A new user types in the desired username. The app checks if the username exists in the Bloom filter.

* If no, the user is created and the username is added to the Bloom filter.
* If yes, the app can decide to either check the main database or reject the username.

## Default bloom properties

Capacity - 100

Error rate - 0.01

> Expansion - 2

Reviewer: As we mention in command documentation, let us clarify the scaling and non scaling cases where expansion is nil.

As bloom filters have a default expansion of 2 this means all default bloom objects will be scaling. These options are used when not specified explicitly in the commands used to create a new bloom object. For example doing a BF.ADD for a new filter will create a filter with the exact above qualities. These default properties can be configured through configs on the bloom module.
Example of default bloom objects information:

```
127.0.0.1:6379> BF.ADD default_filter item
1
127.0.0.1:6379> BF.INFO default_filter
 1) Capacity
 2) (integer) 100
 3) Size
 4) (integer) 384
 5) Number of filters
 6) (integer) 1
 7) Number of items inserted
 8) (integer) 1
 9) Error rate
10) "0.01"
11) Expansion rate
12) (integer) 2
13) Max scaled capacity
14) (integer) 26214300

> ```

Reviewer: We can include advanced / additional properties here as a sub section within the "Default Properties":
 1. Tightening Ratio - We do not recommend tuning this unless there is a specific use case for lower memory usage (with higher false positive) or vice versa.
 2. Seed - This is only useful is a user has a specific 32 byte seed they want their bloom filters to use.

Author: Added these in an advanced properties section.

> ## Performance

Reviewer: It might also be good to talk about the implication of number of scaled out filters vs performance and how it is recommended to choose the capacity and / or expansion rate to better suit their use case in terms of expected number of items to be added

Most bloom commands are O(n * k) where n is the number of hash functions used by the bloom filter and k is the number of elements being inserted. This means that both BF.ADD and BF.EXISTS are both O(n) as they only work with one 1 item.

> There are a few bloom commands that are O(1) as they don't work on items but instead work on the data about the bloom filter itself.

Reviewer: Do you mean BF.CARD and BF.INFO? Maybe you can list the ones you are referring to here

---
title: "Bloom Filters"
description: >
    Introduction to Bloom Filters
---

> Bloom filters are a space efficient probabilistic data structure that allows checking whether an element is member of a set. False positives are possible, but it guarantees no false negatives.

Author: I added a sentence at the top of the page linking the git repo and explaining it is a module

## Bloom commands
* `BF.ADD` adds an item to a bloom filter
* `BF.CARD` returns the cardinality of a bloom filter
* `BF.EXISTS` checks if an item has been added to a bloom filter
* `BF.INFO` returns information about a bloom filter
* `BF.INSERT` can create and/or add items to a bloom filter
* `BF.LOAD` load a bloom filter from a dump
* `BF.MADD` adds one or more items to a bloom filter
* `BF.MEXISTS` checks if one of more items are present in a bloomfilter
* `BF.RESERVE` creates an empty bloom filter

See the [bloom commands in more detail](../commands/#bloom).

## Common use cases for bloom filters

**Financial fraud detection**

> Bloom filters can help answer the question "Has the user paid from this location before?", which can then give insights if there has been suspicious activity in shopping habits.

Reviewer 2: Is this a real use case? The false positive here is not idea, since it might make it seem like a transaction is legitimate when it is not.

Author: Updated this use case to be more about card fraud instead of location based checking

> For the above each user would have a Bloom filter which is then checked for every transaction.

Reviewer 2: Might just merge this into the previous paragraph.

**Ad placement**

Bloom filters can help answer the following questions to advertisers:
* Has the user already seen this ad?
* Has the user already bought this product?

Use a Bloom filter for every user, storing all bought products. The recommendation engine can then suggest a new product and checks if the product is in the user's Bloom filter.

* If no, the ad is shown to the user and is added to the Bloom filter.
* If yes, the process restarts and repeats until it finds a product that is not present in the filter.

**Check if URL's are malicious**

> Bloom filters can answer the question is a URL malicious. Any URL inputted would be checked against a malicious URL bloom filter. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Bloom filters can answer the question "is a URL malicious?". Any URL inputted would be checked against a malicious URL bloom filter. 
```

When a scaling filter reaches its capacity, adding a new unique item will cause a new bloom filter to be created and added to the vector of bloom filters. This new bloom filter will have a larger capacity (previous bloom filter's capacity * expansion rate of the bloom object).

When a non scaling filter reaches its capcity, if a user tries to add a new unique item an error will be returned

The expansion rate is the rate that a scaling bloom filter will have its capacity increased by on the scale out. For example we have a bloom filter with capacity 100 at creation with an expansion rate of 2. After adding 101 unique items we will scale out and create a new filter with capacity 200. Then after adding 200 more unique items (301 items total) we will create a new filter of capacity 400 and so on. 

### When should you use scaling vs non-scaling filters

If the data size is known and fixed then using a non-scaling bloom filter is preferred, for example a static dictionary could use a non scaling bloom filter as the amount of items should be fixed. Likewise the reverse case for dynamic data and unknown final sizes is when you should use a scaling bloom filters.   

> ## Default bloom properties

Reviewer: Optional : We could add a monitoring section and briefly go over the INFO BF command response

bf_bloom_capacity_across_objects:0

# bf_bloom_defrag_metrics
bf_bloom_defrag_hits:0
bf_bloom_defrag_misses:0
127.0.0.1:6379> bf.add key value
(integer) 1
127.0.0.1:6379> info bf
# bf_bloom_core_metrics
bf_bloom_total_memory_bytes:384
bf_bloom_num_objects:1
bf_bloom_num_filters_across_objects:1
bf_bloom_num_items_across_objects:1
bf_bloom_capacity_across_objects:100

# bf_bloom_defrag_metrics
bf_bloom_defrag_hits:0
bf_bloom_defrag_misses:0
```

### Bloom filter core metrics

* `bf_bloom_total_memory_bytes`: Current total number of bytes used by all bloom filters.

* `bf_bloom_num_objects`: Current total number of bloom filters.

* `bf_bloom_num_filters_across_objects`: Current total number of sub filters across all bloom filters.

* `bf_bloom_num_items_across_objects`: Current total number of items across all bloom filters.

* `bf_bloom_capacity_across_objects`: Current total capacity across all bloom filters.

### Bloom filter defrag metrics

* `bf_bloom_defrag_hits`: Total number of defrag hits that have occurred on bloom filters.

* `bf_bloom_defrag_misses`: Total number of defrag misses that have occurred on bloom filters.

## Handling Large Bloom Filters

> There are two limits a bloom filter faces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two notable validations bloom filter faces.
```

> 1. Memory Usage Limit:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Memory Usage:
```

>     The memory usage limit per bloom filter by default is defined by the `BF.BLOOM-MEMORY-USAGE-LIMIT` module configuration which has a default value of 128 MB. If a command results in a creation / scale out causing the overall memory usage to exceed this limit, the command is rejected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The memory usage limit per bloom filter by default is defined by the `BF.BLOOM-MEMORY-USAGE-LIMIT` module configuration which has a default value of 128 MB. If a command results in a creation / scale out causing the overall memory usage to exceed this limit, the command is rejected. This config is modifiable and can be increased as needed.
```

## Scaling and non scaling bloom filters

The difference between scaling and non scaling bloom filters is that scaling bloom filters do not have a fixed capacity, but a capacity that can grow. While non-scaling bloom filters will have a fixed capacity which also means a fixed size. 

When a scaling filter reaches its capacity, adding a new unique item will cause a new bloom filter to be created and added to the vector of bloom filters. This new bloom filter will have a larger capacity (previous bloom filter's capacity * expansion rate of the bloom object).

When a non scaling filter reaches its capacity, if a user tries to add a new unique item an error will be returned

The expansion rate is the rate that a scaling bloom filter will have its capacity increased by on the scale out. For example we have a bloom filter with capacity 100 at creation with an expansion rate of 2. After adding 101 unique items we will scale out and create a new filter with capacity 200. Then after adding 200 more unique items (301 items total) we will create a new filter of capacity 400 and so on. 

### When should you use scaling vs non-scaling filters

> If the data size is known and fixed then using a non-scaling bloom filter is preferred, for example a static dictionary could use a non scaling bloom filter as the amount of items should be fixed. Likewise the reverse case for dynamic data and unknown final sizes is when you should use a scaling bloom filters.
> 
> There are a few benefits for using non scaling filters, a non scaling filter will have better performance than a filter that has scaled out. A non scaling filter also will use less memory for the capacity that is available. However if you don't want to hit an error and want use-as-you-go capacity, scaling is better.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the capacity (number of items we want to add) is known and fixed, using a non-scaling bloom filter is preferred. Likewise the reverse case, if the capacity is unknown / dynamically calculated, using a scaling bloom filters is ideal.

There are a few benefits for using non scaling filters. A non scaling filter will have better performance than a filter that has scaled out several times (e.g. > 100). Also, non scaling filters in general use less memory for a scaling filter that has scaled out several times to hold the same capacity. 

However, to ensure you do not hit any capacity related errors, and want use-as-you-go capacity, scaling is better.
```

### Default bloom properties

<table width="100%" border="1" style="border-collapse: collapse; border: 1px solid black" cellpadding="8">
<tr>
<th width="30%">Property</th>
<th width="30%">Default Value</th>
<th width="40%">Engine Config (Global)</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Capacity</td>
<td>100</td>
<td>BF.BLOOM-CAPACITY</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>False Positive Rate</td>
<td>0.01</td>
<td>BF.BLOOM-FP-RATE</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Scaling / Non Scaling</td>
<td>Scaling</td>
<td>BF.BLOOM-EXPANSION</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Expansion Rate</td>
<td>2</td>
<td>BF.BLOOM-EXPANSION</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Tightening Ratio</td>
<td>0.5</td>
<td>BF.BLOOM-TIGHTENING-RATIO</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Seed</td>
<td>Random Seed</td>
<td>BF.BLOOM-USE-RANDOM-SEED</td>
</tr>
</table>

> As bloom filters have a default expansion of 2 this means all default bloom objects will be scaling. These options are used when not specified explicitly in the commands used to create a new bloom object. For example doing a BF.ADD for a new filter will create a filter with the exact above qualities. These default properties can be configured through configs on the bloom module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since bloom filters have a default expansion of 2, this means all default bloom filter created by default will be scaling. Additionally, the other default properties of a bloom filter creation can be seen in the table above and BF.INFO command response below. These default properties can be configured through configs on the bloom module.
```

> Example of default bloom objects information:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example of default bloom filter properties:
```

11) Expansion rate
12) (integer) 2
13) Tightening ratio
14) "0.5"
15) Max scaled capacity
16) (integer) 26214300
```

## Performance

Most bloom commands are O(n * k) where n is the number of hash functions used by the bloom filter and k is the number of elements being inserted. This means that both BF.ADD and BF.EXISTS are both O(n) as they only work with one 1 item.

As performance can rely on the number of hash functions, choosing the correct capacity and expansion rate can be very important. When you scale out you will be adding more hash functions that will be used. For this reason it is recommended that you should choose a capacity after evaluating your use case as this can avoid several scale outs. 

There are a few bloom commands that are O(1): BF.CARD, BF.INFO, BF.RESERVE, and BF.INSERT (if no items are specified). These commands have constant time complexity since they don't work on items but instead work on the data about the bloom filter itself.

## Monitoring 

To check the overall bloom filter metrics not just for specific filters, you can use the following `info bf` or `info modules`. 

Example of `info bf` calls in different scenarios:

```
127.0.0.1:6379> info bf

> # bf_bloom_core_metrics

Reviewer 3: For the INFO command, these section headings match the argument in uppercase, so I would expect `# BF` here, with a blank line below it.

```Suggestion
# BF

```

Are these fields matching redis bloom info fields or are they invented in valkey-bloom?

Author: That title is determined from the bloom module (https://github.com/valkey-io/valkey-bloom/blob/unstable/src/metrics.rs#L17) and that output is exactly what I get when running `info bf`. I'm pretty sure they were invented in valkey-bloom.

Reviewer 3: > That title is determined from the bloom module

Then maybe valkey-bloom doesn't exactly behave as documented for the INFO command:

       Lines can contain a section name (starting with a # character) or a property.  All
       the properties are in the form of field:value terminated by \r\n.

These lines with # are the section names you can also use as argument for fetching a single section. They're not comments.

Or can you do `INFO bf_bloom_core_metrics` too?

> I'm pretty sure they were invented in valkey-bloom.

Then I'm wondering why the prefix of each field is `bf_bloom` and not just `bf`? BF stands for bloom filter already, right?

Author: You can just do a certain section so `INFO bf_bloom_core_metrics` is valid. 
I think at some point there was thoughts on expanding the bloom module so wasn't just confined to a bloom filter so wanted to specify this was for bloom in particular.

bf_bloom_total_memory_bytes:0
bf_bloom_num_objects:0
bf_bloom_num_filters_across_objects:0
bf_bloom_num_items_across_objects:0
bf_bloom_capacity_across_objects:0

# bf_bloom_defrag_metrics
bf_bloom_defrag_hits:0
bf_bloom_defrag_misses:0
127.0.0.1:6379> bf.add key value
(integer) 1
127.0.0.1:6379> info bf
# bf_bloom_core_metrics
bf_bloom_total_memory_bytes:384
bf_bloom_num_objects:1
bf_bloom_num_filters_across_objects:1
bf_bloom_num_items_across_objects:1
bf_bloom_capacity_across_objects:100

# bf_bloom_defrag_metrics
bf_bloom_defrag_hits:0
bf_bloom_defrag_misses:0
```

> ### Bloom filter core metrics

Reviewer: Change object to filter

> * bf_bloom_total_memory_bytes: Current total number of bytes used by all bloom filters.

Reviewer 3: Use backticks on the field names here (and below).

* `bf_bloom_num_objects`: Current total number of bloom objects.

* `bf_bloom_num_filters_across_objects`: Current total number of filters across all bloom objects.

* `bf_bloom_num_items_across_objects`: Current total number of items across all bloom objects.

> * `bf_bloom_capacity_across_objects`: Current total number of filters across all bloom objects.

Reviewer: We can update this

Bloom filters can answer the question "is a URL malicious?". Any URL inputted would be checked against a malicious URL bloom filter. 

* If no, then we allow access to the site
* If yes, then we can deny access or perform a full check of the URL

### Check if a username is taken

Bloom filters can answer the question: Has this username/email/domain name/slug already been used?

In this username example, we can use use a Bloom filter to track every username that has signed up. When a new user attempts to sign up with their desired username, the app checks if the username exists in the Bloom filter.

* If no, the user is created and the username is added to the Bloom filter.
* If yes, the app can decide to either check the main database or reject the username.

## Scaling and non scaling bloom filters

The difference between scaling and non scaling bloom filters is that scaling bloom filters do not have a fixed capacity, but a capacity that can grow. While non-scaling bloom filters will have a fixed capacity which also means a fixed size. Scaling bloom filters consist of a vector of “Subfilters” with length >= 1 while non scaling will only contain 1 subfilter.

> When a scaling filter reaches its capacity, adding a new unique item will cause a new bloom filter to be created and added to the vector of bloom filters. This new bloom filter will have a larger capacity (previous bloom filter's capacity * expansion rate of the bloom object).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a scaling bloom filter reaches its capacity, adding a new unique item will trigger a scale out and a new sub filter is created and added to the vector of sub filters. This new sub filter will have a larger capacity (previous bloom filter's capacity * expansion rate of the bloom object).
```

Example of default bloom filter information:

```
127.0.0.1:6379> BF.ADD default_filter item
1
127.0.0.1:6379> BF.INFO default_filter
 1) Capacity
 2) (integer) 100
 3) Size
 4) (integer) 384
 5) Number of filters
 6) (integer) 1
 7) Number of items inserted
 8) (integer) 2
 9) Error rate
10) "0.01"
11) Expansion rate
12) (integer) 2
13) Tightening ratio
14) "0.5"
15) Max scaled capacity
16) (integer) 26214300
```

## Performance

The bloom commands which involve adding items or checking the existence of items have a time complexity of O(n * k) where n is the number of hash functions used by the bloom filter and k is the number of elements being inserted. This means that both BF.ADD and BF.EXISTS are both O(n) as they only operate on one item.

> Since performance relies on the number of hash functions, choosing the correct capacity and expansion rate can be important. In case of scalable bloom filters, with every scale out, we increase the number of checks (using hash functions of each sub filter) performed during any add / exists operation. For this reason, it is recommended that users choose a capacity after evaluating the use case / workload to help avoid several scale outs and reduce the number of checks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since performance relies on the number of hash functions, choosing the correct capacity and expansion rate can be important. In case of scalable bloom filters, with every scale out, we increase the number of checks (using hash functions of each sub filter) performed during any add / exists operation. For this reason, it is recommended that users choose a capacity after evaluating the use case / workload to avoid several scale outs and reduce the number of checks.
```

There other bloom filter commands are O(1) time complexity: BF.CARD, BF.INFO, BF.RESERVE, and BF.INSERT (when no items are provided).

## Monitoring 

> To check the overall bloom filter metrics not just for specific filters, you can use the following `info bf` or `info modules`. 

Reviewer: Let's use upper case for all commands everywhere.

```suggestion
To check the overall bloom filter metrics not just for specific filters, you can use the following `INFO BF` or `INFO MODULES`. 
```

> Example of `info bf` calls in different scenarios:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example of `INFO BF` calls in different scenarios:
```

```

> 127.0.0.1:6379> info bf

Reviewer: ```suggestion
127.0.0.1:6379> INFO BF
```

# bf_bloom_defrag_metrics
bf_bloom_defrag_hits:0
bf_bloom_defrag_misses:0
127.0.0.1:6379> bf.add key value
(integer) 1
127.0.0.1:6379> info bf
# bf_bloom_core_metrics
bf_bloom_total_memory_bytes:384
bf_bloom_num_objects:1
bf_bloom_num_filters_across_objects:1
bf_bloom_num_items_across_objects:1
bf_bloom_capacity_across_objects:100

# bf_bloom_defrag_metrics
bf_bloom_defrag_hits:0
bf_bloom_defrag_misses:0
```

### Bloom filter core metrics

* `bf_bloom_total_memory_bytes`: Current total number of bytes used by all bloom filters.

* `bf_bloom_num_objects`: Current total number of bloom filters.

* `bf_bloom_num_filters_across_objects`: Current total number of subfilters across all bloom filters.

* `bf_bloom_num_items_across_objects`: Current total number of items across all bloom filters.

* `bf_bloom_capacity_across_objects`: Current total capacity across all bloom filters.

### Bloom filter defrag metrics

* `bf_bloom_defrag_hits`: Total number of defrag hits that have occurred on bloom filters.

* `bf_bloom_defrag_misses`: Total number of defrag misses that have occurred on bloom filters.

## Limits

There are two limits a bloom filter faces.

1. Memory Usage Limit:

>     The memory usage limit per bloom filter by default is defined by the BF.BLOOM-MEMORY-USAGE-LIMIT module configuration which has a default value of 128 MB. If a command results in a creation / scale out causing the overall memory usage to exceed this limit, the command is rejected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The memory usage limit per bloom filter by default is defined by the `BF.BLOOM-MEMORY-USAGE-LIMIT` module configuration which has a default value of 128 MB. If a command results in a creation / scale out causing the overall memory usage to exceed this limit, the command is rejected.
```

2. Number of sub filters (in case of scalable bloom filters):

    When a bloom filter scales out, a new sub filter is added. The limit on the number of sub filters depends on the false positive rate and tightening ratio. Each sub filter has a stricter false positive, and this is controlled by the tightening ratio. If a command attempting a scale out results in the sub filter reaching a false positive of 0, the command is rejected. 

> We have implemented VALIDATESCALETO as an optional arg of BF.INSERT to help determine whether the bloom filter can scale out to the reach the specified capacity without hitting either limits mentioned above, and will reject the command otherwise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have implemented `VALIDATESCALETO` as an optional arg of `BF.INSERT` to help determine whether the bloom filter can scale out to the reach the specified capacity without hitting either limits mentioned above, and will reject the command otherwise.
```

As seen below when trying to create a bloom filter with a capacity more than what is possible given the memory limits, the command is rejected. However if the wanted capacity is within the limits then the creation of the bloom filter will succeed.

Example:

```
127.0.0.1:6379> BF.INSERT validate_scale_fail VALIDATESCALETO 26214301
(error) ERR provided VALIDATESCALETO causes bloom object to exceed memory limit
127.0.0.1:6379> BF.INSERT validate_scale_valid VALIDATESCALETO 26214300
[]
```

> We can use the BF.INFO command's MAXSCALEDCAPACITY field to find out the maximum capacity that the scalable bloom filter can expand to hold.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can use the `BF.INFO` command's `MAXSCALEDCAPACITY` field to find out the maximum capacity that the scalable bloom filter can expand to hold.
```

## Basic Bloom commands

* `BF.ADD` adds an item to a bloom filter
* `BF.CARD` returns the cardinality of a bloom filter
* `BF.EXISTS` checks if an item has been added to a bloom filter
* `BF.INFO` returns information about a bloom filter

See the [complete list of bloom filter commands](../commands/#bloom).

## Common use cases for bloom filters

### Fraud detection

Bloom filters can be used to answer the question, "Has this card been flagged as stolen?". To do this, use a bloom filter that contains cards reported as stolen. When a card is used, check whether it is present in the bloom filter. If the card is not found, it means it is not marked as stolen. If the card is present in the filter, a check can be made against the main database, or the purchase can be denied.

### Ad placement / Deduplication

> Bloom filters can help advertisers answer the following questions:
> * Has the user already seen this ad?
> * Has the user already purchased this product?
> 
> For each user, use a Bloom filter to store all the products they have purchased. The recommendation engine can then suggest a new product and check if it is present in the user's Bloom filter.
> 
> * If the product is not in the filter, the ad is shown to the user, and the product is added to the filter.
> * If the product is already in the filter, it means the ad has already been shown to the user and the recommendation engine finds a different ad to show.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bloom filters can help e-commerce sites, streaming services, advertising networks, or marketing platforms answer the following questions:
* Has an advertisement already been shown to a user?
* Has a promotional email or notification already been sent to a user?
* Has a product already been purchased by a user?

Example: For each user, use a Bloom filter to store all the products they have purchased. The recommendation engine can then suggest a new product and check if it is present in the user's Bloom filter.

* If the product is not in the filter, the ad is shown to the user, and the product is added to the filter.
* If the product is already in the filter, it means the ad has already been shown to the user and the recommendation engine finds a different ad to show.
```

> ### Check if URL's are malicious

Reviewer: Above this, we could add a use case for "Filtering out Spam/Harmful Content"

</tr>
<tr>
<td>Tightening Ratio</td>
<td>0.5</td>
<td>BF.INSERT</td>
<td>BF.BLOOM-TIGHTENING-RATIO</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Seed</td>
<td>Random Seed</td>
<td>BF.INSERT</td>
<td>BF.BLOOM-USE-RANDOM-SEED</td>
</tr>
</table>

Since bloom filters have a default expansion of 2, this means any default creation as a result of `BF.ADD`, `BF.MADD`, `BF.INSERT` will be a scalable bloom filter. Users can create a non scaling bloom filter using `BF.RESERVE <filter-name> <error-rate> <capacity> NONSCALING` or by specifying `NONSCALING` in `BF.INSERT`. Additionally, the other default properties of a bloom filter creation can be seen in the table above and BF.INFO command response below. These default properties can be configured through configs on the bloom module.

Example of default bloom filter information:

```
127.0.0.1:6379> BF.ADD default_filter item
1
127.0.0.1:6379> BF.INFO default_filter
 1) Capacity
 2) (integer) 100
 3) Size
 4) (integer) 384
 5) Number of filters
 6) (integer) 1
 7) Number of items inserted
 8) (integer) 2
 9) Error rate
10) "0.01"
11) Expansion rate
12) (integer) 2
13) Tightening ratio
14) "0.5"
15) Max scaled capacity
16) (integer) 26214300
```

## Performance

> The bloom commands which involve adding items or checking the existence of items have a time complexity of O(n * k) where n is the number of hash functions used by the bloom filter and k is the number of elements being inserted. This means that both BF.ADD and BF.EXISTS are both O(n) as they only operate on one item.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The bloom commands which involve adding items or checking the existence of items have a time complexity of O(N * K) where N is the number of hash functions used by the bloom filter and K is the number of elements being inserted. This means that both BF.ADD and BF.EXISTS are both O(N) as they only operate on one item.
```

> Since performance relies on the number of hash functions, choosing the correct capacity and expansion rate can be important. In case of scalable bloom filters, with every scale out, we increase the number of checks (using hash functions of each sub filter) performed during any add / exists operation. For this reason, it is recommended that users choose a capacity after evaluating the use case / workload to avoid several scale outs and reduce the number of checks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case of scalable bloom filters, with every scale out, we increase the number of checks (using hash functions of each sub filter) performed during any add / exists operation. For this reason, it is recommended that users choose a capacity and expansion rate after evaluating the use case / workload to avoid several scale outs and reduce the number of checks.
```

* `bf_bloom_capacity_across_objects`: Current total capacity across all bloom filters.

### Bloom filter defrag metrics

* `bf_bloom_defrag_hits`: Total number of defrag hits that have occurred on bloom filters.

* `bf_bloom_defrag_misses`: Total number of defrag misses that have occurred on bloom filters.

## Limits

There are two limits a bloom filter faces.

1. Memory Usage Limit:

    The memory usage limit per bloom filter by default is defined by the `BF.BLOOM-MEMORY-USAGE-LIMIT` module configuration which has a default value of 128 MB. If a command results in a creation / scale out causing the overall memory usage to exceed this limit, the command is rejected.

2. Number of sub filters (in case of scalable bloom filters):

    When a bloom filter scales out, a new sub filter is added. The limit on the number of sub filters depends on the false positive rate and tightening ratio. Each sub filter has a stricter false positive, and this is controlled by the tightening ratio. If a command attempting a scale out results in the sub filter reaching a false positive of 0, the command is rejected. 

> We have implemented `VALIDATESCALETO` as an optional arg of `BF.INSERT` to help determine whether the bloom filter can scale out to the reach the specified capacity without hitting either limits mentioned above, and will reject the command otherwise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have implemented `VALIDATESCALETO` as an optional arg of `BF.INSERT` to help determine whether the bloom filter can scale out to the reach the specified capacity without hitting either limits mentioned above. It will reject the command otherwise.
```

> As seen below when trying to create a bloom filter with a capacity more than what is possible given the memory limits, the command is rejected. However if the wanted capacity is within the limits then the creation of the bloom filter will succeed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As seen below, when trying to create a bloom filter with a capacity that cannot be achieved through scale outs (given the memory limits), the command is rejected. However, if the capacity can be achieved through scale out (even with the limits) then the creation of the bloom filter will succeed.
```

> As seen below, when trying to create a bloom filter with a capacity that cannot be achieved through scale outs (given the memory limits), the command is rejected. However, if the capacity can be achieved through scale out (even with the limits) then the creation of the bloom filter will succeed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As seen below, when trying to create a bloom filter with a capacity that cannot be achieved through scale outs (given the memory limits), the command is rejected. However, if the capacity can be achieved through scale out (even with the limits), the creation of the bloom filter will succeed.
```

### Advanced Properties

The following two properties can be specified in the `BF.INSERT` command:

* Seed -  This is the key with which hash functions are created for the bloom filter. In case of scalable bloom filters, the same seed is used across all sub filters. This property is only useful if you have a specific 32 byte seed that you want your bloom filter to use. By default every bloom filter will use a random seed.

* Tightening Ratio - This is a property of scalable bloom filters which controls the overall correctness of the bloom filter as it scales out by keeping the actual false positive rate closer to the user requested false positive rate when the bloom filter was created. This is done by using the tightening ratio to set a stricter false positive on the new sub filter which gets created during each scale out. We do not recommend fine tuning this unless there is a specific use case for lower memory usage with higher false positive or vice versa.

### Default bloom properties

These are the default bloom properties along with the commands and configs which allow customizing.

> <table width="100%" border="1" style="border-collapse: collapse; border: 1px solid black" cellpadding="8">

Reviewer 2: I think this will be wonky when ever we end up putting it in a man page. I think we should keep it as vanilla markdown.

bf_bloom_num_items_across_objects:0
bf_bloom_capacity_across_objects:0

# bf_bloom_defrag_metrics
bf_bloom_defrag_hits:0
bf_bloom_defrag_misses:0
127.0.0.1:6379> bf.add key value
(integer) 1
127.0.0.1:6379> info bf
# bf_bloom_core_metrics
bf_bloom_total_memory_bytes:384
bf_bloom_num_objects:1
bf_bloom_num_filters_across_objects:1
bf_bloom_num_items_across_objects:1
bf_bloom_capacity_across_objects:100

# bf_bloom_defrag_metrics
bf_bloom_defrag_hits:0
bf_bloom_defrag_misses:0
```

### Bloom filter core metrics

* `bf_bloom_total_memory_bytes`: Current total number of bytes used by all bloom filters.

* `bf_bloom_num_objects`: Current total number of bloom filters.

* `bf_bloom_num_filters_across_objects`: Current total number of sub filters across all bloom filters.

* `bf_bloom_num_items_across_objects`: Current total number of items across all bloom filters.

* `bf_bloom_capacity_across_objects`: Current total capacity across all bloom filters.

### Bloom filter defrag metrics

* `bf_bloom_defrag_hits`: Total number of defrag hits that have occurred on bloom filters.

* `bf_bloom_defrag_misses`: Total number of defrag misses that have occurred on bloom filters.

> ## Limits

Reviewer 2: These are more of configs as opposed to limits.

Reviewer: In this document, we do already list the configs in a section above.

How about naming this section as ""Large Bloom Filters"? Or "Handling Large Bloom Filters"?

There are two limits a bloom filter faces.

1. Memory Usage Limit:

    The memory usage limit per bloom filter by default is defined by the `BF.BLOOM-MEMORY-USAGE-LIMIT` module configuration which has a default value of 128 MB. If a command results in a creation / scale out causing the overall memory usage to exceed this limit, the command is rejected.

2. Number of sub filters (in case of scalable bloom filters):

    When a bloom filter scales out, a new sub filter is added. The limit on the number of sub filters depends on the false positive rate and tightening ratio. Each sub filter has a stricter false positive, and this is controlled by the tightening ratio. If a command attempting a scale out results in the sub filter reaching a false positive of 0, the command is rejected. 

> We have implemented `VALIDATESCALETO` as an optional arg of `BF.INSERT` to help determine whether the bloom filter can scale out to the reach the specified capacity without hitting either limits mentioned above. It will reject the command otherwise.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use `VALIDATESCALETO` as an optional arg of `BF.INSERT` to help determine whether the bloom filter can scale out to the reach the specified capacity without hitting either limits mentioned above. It will reject the command otherwise.
```
